[Doc] Update Customize Datasets Doc (#2079)
open-mmlab/mmsegmentation: docs/en/advanced_guides/add_dataset.md

# Add New Datasets

## Data configuration

> `train_dataloader`, `val_dataloader` and `test_dataloader` in config file are the variables for data configuration, to define the arguments that are used in datasets and dataloaders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`train_dataloader`, `val_dataloader` and `test_dataloader` in config file are the variables for dataloader configuration, to define the arguments that are used in datasets and dataloaders.
```

Here is an example of dataloader configuration:

```python
train_dataloader = dict(
    batch_size=4,
    num_workers=4,
    persistent_workers=True,
    sampler=dict(type='InfiniteSampler', shuffle=True),
    dataset=dict(
        type=dataset_type,
        data_root=data_root,
        data_prefix=dict(
            img_path='images/training', seg_map_path='annotations/training'),
        pipeline=train_pipeline))
val_dataloader = dict(
    batch_size=1,
    num_workers=4,
    persistent_workers=True,
    sampler=dict(type='DefaultSampler', shuffle=False),
    dataset=dict(
        type=dataset_type,
        data_root=data_root,
        data_prefix=dict(
            img_path='images/validation',
            seg_map_path='annotations/validation'),
        pipeline=test_pipeline))
test_dataloader = val_dataloader
```

> - The setting of `xxx_dataloader` works for model training, validation and testing that are by [`build and registry`](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmengine/blob/master/docs/en/tutorials/registry.md) mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `train_dataloader`, `test_dataloader`, and `val_dataloader` are input variables of `Runner` and work for model training, validation and testing that
```

# Add New Datasets

## Data configuration

`train_dataloader`, `val_dataloader` and `test_dataloader` in config file are the variables for data configuration, to define the arguments that are used in datasets and dataloaders.

Here is an example of dataloader configuration:

```python
train_dataloader = dict(
    batch_size=4,
    num_workers=4,
    persistent_workers=True,
    sampler=dict(type='InfiniteSampler', shuffle=True),
    dataset=dict(
        type=dataset_type,
        data_root=data_root,
        data_prefix=dict(
            img_path='images/training', seg_map_path='annotations/training'),
        pipeline=train_pipeline))
val_dataloader = dict(
    batch_size=1,
    num_workers=4,
    persistent_workers=True,
    sampler=dict(type='DefaultSampler', shuffle=False),
    dataset=dict(
        type=dataset_type,
        data_root=data_root,
        data_prefix=dict(
            img_path='images/validation',
            seg_map_path='annotations/validation'),
        pipeline=test_pipeline))
test_dataloader = val_dataloader
```

> - `train_dataloader`, `val_dataloader` and `test_dataloader`: The [`config`](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmcv/blob/master/docs/en/understand_mmcv/config.md)s to build dataset instances for model training, validation and testing by

Reviewer: config is moved in engine from mmcv

> - `train_dataloader`, `val_dataloader` and `test_dataloader`: The [`config`](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmcv/blob/master/docs/en/understand_mmcv/config.md)s to build dataset instances for model training, validation and testing by

Reviewer: The setting of dataloaders  works for model training, validation and testing that are by `build and registry` mechanism

  using [`build and registry`](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmcv/blob/master/docs/en/understand_mmcv/registry.md) mechanism.

> - `batch_size`: How many samples per batch and per gpu to load during model training, and the total batch sizes of training is equal to `batch_size` times gpu number, e.g. when using 8 gpus for distributed data parallel trainig and `batch_size=4`, the total batch sizes is `8*4=32`.

Reviewer: How many samples per batch and per gpu to load during model training - > the number of a batch sample of each gpu

  If you would like to define `batch_size` for testing and validation, please use `test_dataloaser` and
  `val_dataloader` with mmseg >=0.24.1.

- `num_workers`: How many subprocesses per gpu to use for data loading. `0` means that the data will be loaded in the main process.

> **Note:** Default setting of `batch_size` is 1 in MMSegmentation when model testing and validation (DO NOT support batch inference yet).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** Default setting of `batch_size` is `1` in MMSegmentation when model testing and validation due to different shapes of samples in a dataset.
```

> **Note:** Before v0.24.1, except `train`, `val` `test`, `samples_per_gpu` and `workers_per_gpu`, the other keys in `data` must be the
> input keyword arguments for `dataloader` in pytorch, and the dataloaders used for model training, validation and testing have the same input arguments.
> In v0.24.1, MMSegmentation supports to use `train_dataloader`, `test_dataloaser` and `val_dataloader` to specify different keyword arguments, and still supports the overall arguments definition but the specific dataloader setting has a higher priority.
> After v1.0.0rc0, MMSegmentation would only use `train_dataloader`, `test_dataloaser` and `val_dataloader`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

For example, suppose the original dataset is `Dataset_A`, to repeat it, the config looks like the following

```python

> dataset_A_train_dataloader = dict(

Reviewer: there is no necessary to config a `dataset_A_train_dataloader`, please remove it  and just keep dataset configuration

    # There is a configuration for dataset.
    dataset=dict(
        type='RepeatDataset',
        times=N,
        dataset=dict(  # This is the original config of Dataset_A
            type='Dataset_A',
            ...
            pipeline=train_pipeline
            )
        )
    )
```

### Concatenate dataset

If the datasets you want to concatenate are in the same type with different annotation files, you can concatenate the dataset configs like the following.

> ````

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

You may concatenate two `dataset`.

  ```python

>     dataset_train_1 = dict(

Reviewer: The intent is not required.

        type=dataset_type,
        data_root=data_root,
        data_prefix=dict(img_path='img_dir', seg_map_path='ann_dir_1'),
        ann_file='ann_file_1.txt',
        pipeline=train_pipeline)
    dataset_train_2 = dict(
        type=dataset_type,
        data_root=data_root,
        data_prefix=dict(img_path='img_dir', seg_map_path='ann_dir_2'),
        ann_file='ann_file_2.txt',
        pipeline=train_pipeline)
    train_dataloader = dict(
        batch_size=4,
        num_workers=4,
        persistent_workers=True,
        sampler=dict(type='InfiniteSampler', shuffle=True),
        dataset=dict(type='ConcatDataset', datasets=[dataset_train_1, dataset_train_2]))
  ```

  In this case, `ann_dir_1` and `ann_dir_2` are corresponding to `ann_file_1.txt` and `ann_file_2.txt`.
````

### Multi-image Mix Dataset

We use `MultiImageMixDataset` as a wrapper to mix images from multiple datasets.

> `MultiImageMixDataset` can be used by multiple images mixed data augmentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`MultiImageMixDataset` can be used for images mixed data augmentation
```

like mosaic and mixup.

> An example of using `MultiImageMixDataset` with `Mosaic` data augmentation:

Reviewer: There is an example...

```python
train_pipeline = [
    dict(type='LoadImageFromFile'),
    dict(type='LoadAnnotations'),
    dict(type='RandomMosaic', prob=1),
    dict(
        type='RandomResize',
        scale=(2048, 512),
        ratio_range=(0.5, 2.0),
        keep_ratio=True),
    dict(type='RandomCrop', crop_size=crop_size, cat_max_ratio=0.75),
    dict(type='RandomFlip', prob=0.5),
    dict(type='PhotoMetricDistortion'),
    dict(type='PackSegInputs')
]

train_dataloader = dict(
    batch_size=4,
    num_workers=4,
    persistent_workers=True,
    sampler=dict(type='InfiniteSampler', shuffle=True),
    dataset=dict(
        type='MultiImageMixDataset',
        dataset=dict(
            classes=classes,
            palette=palette,
            type=dataset_type,
            reduce_zero_label=False,
            data_prefix=dict(img_path=data_root + "images/train",
                             seg_map_path=data_root + "annotations/train"),
            pipeline=[
                dict(type='LoadImageFromFile'),
                dict(type='LoadAnnotations'),
            ]
        ),

>         pipeline=train_pipeline)

Reviewer: what is the difference between `pipeline` in line 185 and `pipeline` in line 190

For example, suppose the original dataset is `Dataset_A`, to repeat it, the config looks like the following

```python
dataset_A_train_dataloader = dict(

>     dataset=dict(

Reviewer: there is a configuration for dataset.

    dict(type='PhotoMetricDistortion'),
    dict(type='PackSegInputs')
]

train_dataloader = dict(
    batch_size=4,
    num_workers=4,
    persistent_workers=True,
    sampler=dict(type='InfiniteSampler', shuffle=True),
    dataset=dict(
        type='MultiImageMixDataset',
        dataset=dict(
            classes=classes,
            palette=palette,
            type=dataset_type,
            reduce_zero_label=False,
            data_prefix=dict(img_path=data_root + "images/train",
                             seg_map_path=data_root + "annotations/train"),
            pipeline=[
                dict(type='LoadImageFromFile'),
                dict(type='LoadAnnotations'),
            ]
        ),
        pipeline=train_pipeline)
)
```

## How to prepare your own dataset

Preparation of your own dataset is divided into following steps:

- Dataset preparation, generating correct data format and saving it to correct place like `./data/`.
- Define your dataset in `./mmseg/datasets/` to register it in `DATASETS`.
- Setting hyperparameters of training and validation in `./configs/_base_/datasets/`, such as data augmentation strategy, image crop size and image pixel normalization.

> Files needed to be modified are listed below:

Reviewer: Datasets should follow the below structure.

```none
mmsegmentation
   |
   |- data
   |     |- my_dataset                 # your dataset after data conversion
   |- mmseg
   |     |- datasets

>    |     |     |- __init__.py          # add your dataset class here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   |     |     |- __init__.py          # import your dataset class here
```

>    |     |     |- my_dataset.py               ## define your dataset class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   |     |     |- my_dataset.py               ## implement your dataset class
```

   |     |     |- ...
   |- configs
   |     |- _base_
   |     |     |- datasets

>    |     |     |     |- my_dataset_config.py      # config of your dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   |     |     |     |- my_dataset_config.py      # config file of your dataset
```

   |     |     |- ...
   |     |- ...
   |- ...
```

### Preparation of dataset

First, convert your dataset into following format, where `img_suffix` and `seg_map_suffix` are format of images and annotations, which are usually `.png` and `.jpg`.

```none
├── data
│   ├── my_dataset
│   │   ├── img_dir
│   │   │   ├── train
│   │   │   │   ├── xxx{img_suffix}
│   │   │   │   ├── yyy{img_suffix}
│   │   │   ├── val
│   │   │   │   ├── zzz{img_suffix}
│   │   ├── ann_dir
│   │   │   ├── train
│   │   │   │   ├── xxx{seg_map_suffix}
│   │   │   │   ├── yyy{seg_map_suffix}
│   │   │   ├── val
│   │   │   │   ├── zzz{seg_map_suffix}

```

### Dataset Registration

After your dataset conversion done above, create a new file `my_dataset.py` in `./mmseg/dataset/`, where defining `MyDataset` class could be registered into `DATASETS` of MMCV and be used by model.

```python
from .builder import DATASETS
from .custom import CustomDataset

# Register MyDataset class into DATASETS
@DATASETS.register_module()

> class MyDataset(CustomDataset):

Reviewer: there is no customdataset in mmseg

    METAINFO = dict(
        # Class names of your dataset annotations, i.e., actual names of corresponding label 0, 1, 2 in annotation segmentation maps
        classes = ('background', 'label_a', 'label_b', 'label_c',
           'label_d', ...)
        # BGR value of corresponding classes, which are used for visualization
        palette = [[255, 255, 255], [0, 0, 255], [0, 255, 255], [0, 255, 0],
           [255, 255, 0], ...]
    )

    # The formats of image and segmentation map are both .png in this case
    def __init__(self, **kwargs):
        super(MyDataset, self).__init__(
            img_suffix='.png',
            seg_map_suffix='.png',

>             reduce_zero_label=False, # reduce_zero_label is False because label 0 is background (first one in CLASSES above)

Reviewer: the explanation of `reduce zero label` is no proper

            **kwargs)
```

`classes` and `palette` in `METAINFO` are defined in `./mmseg/dataset/my_dataset.py`, which are class names and BGR values of annotations, respectively.
Besides,`palette` would only be used in prediction visulization, which would not affect process of training and validation.

> Specifically, if label 0 in segmentation map is not background, it should be set `reduce_zero_label=True`.

Reviewer: it is no proper

After creating `./mmseg/dataset/my_dataset.py`后，it is also necessary to add it in `./mmseg/dataset/__init__.py`:

```python

> # Copyright (c) OpenMMLab. All rights reserved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

from .my_dataset import MyDataset

__all__ = [
    ...,
    'MyDataset'
]
```

### Set config file of dataset

After defining your dataset, it is also necessary to define configs of your dataset `my_dataset_config.py` in `./configs/_base_/datasets/`, which would be used concurrently with other config parameters in training and inference.

```python

> # Your dataset type defined in ./mmseg/datasets/__init__.py

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Class name defined in ./mmseg/datasets/my_dataset.py
```

        data_root=data_root, # The root of dataset.
        data_prefix=dict(
            # The image directory of dataset.
            img_path='images/training',
            # The annotation directory of dataset.
            seg_map_path='annotations/training'),
        # pipeline, this is passed by the train_pipeline created before.
        pipeline=train_pipeline))
# Validation dataset config
val_dataloader = dict(
    ...
)
# Test dataset config
test_dataloader = val_dataloader

val_evaluator = dict(type='IoUMetric', iou_metrics=['mIoU'])
test_evaluator = val_evaluator
```

More information of each config parameter could be found [config.md](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmsegmentation/blob/master/docs/en/tutorials/config.md) 。

After dataset preparation is finished, just import `./configs/_base_/datasets/my_dataset_config.py` in model config file, for example:

```python
_base_ = [
    '../_base_/models/pspnet_r50-d8.py', '../_base_/datasets/my_dataset_config.py',
    '../_base_/default_runtime.py', '../_base_/schedules/schedule_80k.py'
]
model = dict(
    decode_head=dict(num_classes=YOUR_DATASET_CLASSES), auxiliary_head=dict(num_classes=YOUR_DATASET_CLASSES))

```

> By now, you can use your own dataset in MMSegmentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
